# Comparative-Analysis-Covid-19-in-USA-and-Saudi-Arabia-
Key metrics being tracked based on the health impact (COVID-19) in Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and United states of America.
The virus that causes COVID-19 is dangerous enough to be impacting economies, food systems and supply chains alongside devastating consequences for people’s health. Wherever there is weakness or a gap in the working of systems, the virus finds opportunities to proliferate; once established, it is capable of exponential growth whereby a few cases can rapidly multiply by thousands to produce explosive outbreaks. These stop people in communities and cities from leading their normal lives.
The novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was first isolated from biological samples in Wuhan, China, in December 2019.  The virus spread internationally within 1 month of first being identified, being transmitted via close human-to-human contact (2). The World Health Organization (WHO) declared COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) a Public Health Emergency of International Concern on 1 February 2020. Over 200 countries have confirmed cases to date, including countries from Asia, Europe, North America and the Middle East. Adults contributed to the highest proportion (on average 89.0%) of the daily reported new COVID-19 cases, compared to children and elderly. Studies also confirmed that mortality of COVID-19 is linked with age: 80% of reported deaths in China were of individuals aged over 65 years old, and up to 15% of the deaths in the US were among adults over 70 years.
3,4. Saudi Arabia:
The first case of COVID-19 was reported by the Saudi authorities on the 2nd of March 2020.
Given their potential role in spreading COVID-19,  risk assessment for mass gatherings and events using a modified Jeddah Tool were conducted before the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in the Kingdom.
As a result, the number of sporting, cultural and entertainment events were canceled on 27th of February 2020. The Kingdom suspended the Umrah (religious pilgrim) mass gathering for the first time in many decades. On the 8th of March 2020, the Saudi Ministry of Education declared the closure of schools and suspension of teaching at universities and other institutions until further notice to avoid the spread of the disease through these congregated settings. In the face of increasing number of COVID-19 cases in the Kingdom (Fig. 1), by the 20th or March 2020, the Saudi authorities suspended all domestic public transport; flights, trains, buses and taxis in a heightened effort to stop the spread of the virus.
4. First of all, lets analyze the dashboard, indicating key metrics related to the impact of COVID-19 in Saudi Arabia, and we will go through each graph to gain insight on dynamics of the covid-19.
5. The pie chart shows that by November first, 2020, the total number of cases have been recorded as 46,916,483 and Total deaths being 571,940. Several recent studies have speculated on the reasons for age being a risk factor of COVID-19. For example, the authors of the many studies highlighted that patients aged >60 years were at higher risk of hospital mortality due to COVID-19.
6. The Ratio of total cases to Saudi Population is 0.005264, which means that only 0.5% of the total Saudi population have been affected with confirmed covid-19 cases until November the first. The ratio of total death to total cases is 0.0122, meaning only 1 % out of the total covid-19 cases have been affected with death in kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
7. As can be seen, the new positive cases and death cases are being regulated on monthly basis are getting relatively lower and more stable starting august 2020 onwards because The Saudi authorities have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 situation and the Kingdom is keeping to take decisive and bold measures to safeguard its citizens, residents and visitors as well as the global community, even at a great socioeconomic cost.
8. Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Government and institution measures in response to COVID-19
Saudi government provided a stimulus and support packages of $61 billion. Compensation of %60 of the salary for Saudi employees in the private sector. Human Resource Development Fund has allocated SAR 5.3bn to support private sector enterprises to hire and train nationals. Providing concessional financing for SMEs in an amount up to (13.2 billion riyals), by granting facilities from banks and finance companies to the SME sector in order to support business continuity and growth in this sector during the current stage.

Social Development Bank has issued a SAR 13bn initiative to support citizens, families and small establishments to cope with COVID-19 economical impact. Approved a 30% discount for two months on utility bills for the commercial, industrial and agricultural sector.

Postponing the payment of commercial registration fees to more than 116,000 commercial record. 25% reduction of expat levy for operational factories until end of year. Postponing and restructuring the payment of loans installments for large and small factories small projects and medical projects due in 2020.
Now you have a sense for what has been happening in kingdom of Saudi Arabi, what are its key metrics and what kind of measures has the kingdom taken. The next question is, what other country will we analyze to give final policy recommendations?
9. The next dashboard gives a snapshot of comparative analysis on key metrics of covid-19 between Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and United States of America. This split analysis is vital to understand covid-19 trends because to offer sound policy recommendations.
10. United states of America,
COVID-19 STATISTICS, 2020: 
A patient in the United States was given a diagnosis of infection with this virus by the state of Washington and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on January 20, 2020. 

On March 12, 2020, President Donald Trump declared a national emergency to combat the spread of COVID-19 in the USA, which led to a range of social distancing interventions across the country, including closures of schools, bars, cinemas, and restaurants, cancellation of large public gatherings, including cultural and sporting events, and discouraging gatherings of more than 50 people. Moreover, an increasing number of businesses and companies have asked their employees to work remotely. These social distancing measures are reducing the transmission rate of the virus and, in turn, reducing the risk of death for the most vulnerable populations.

Presidential Proclamation on travel to the United States from and transiting through Europe: March 11, 2020, related to reducing the spread of COVID-19, suspends the entry into the United States, as immigrants or nonimmigrants, of all aliens who were physically present within Europe.
11. The next graphs depict Comparative country analysis:

Total cases to population ratio In Saudi Arabia was 0.005264, while in the state the same ratio has stood at 0.00924, meaning that the total number of covid-19 cases to the total number of population in the united states has been twice as more compared with Saudi Arabia. In addition, total deaths to total cases ratio is USA is 0.0331, while the same figure stands at 0.0122 in united states of America, meaning the death rate has been three times more in USA compared with Saudi Arabia in respect to the total covid-19 cases . The kingdom of Saudi arabia has shown robust preparedness and public health response capabilities strengthened by the valuable experience gained during its managing of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) reported in 2012 and decades of planning religious mass gatherings in the face or numerous public health challenges. A testament to this is the Kingdom's recent successful planning and management of the Hajj in the midst of infectious diseases outbreaks and public health emergencies of international concern, including the H1N1 pandemic influenza and the SARS, MERS, rift valley fever, ZIKA and Ebola virus disease outbreaks. KSA is currently drawing on these successful experiences to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
12. It can be clearly seen from the bar graph that the total monthly new cases are being regulated in Saudi Arabia better than in USA.
13. United states of America
Government and institution measures in response to COVID-19
Phase 1 (March 6, 2020)–Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, 
$8.3 billion in aid: Initial funding and support for vaccine development
Phase 2 (March 18, 2020)–Families First Coronavirus Response Act
•	$105 billion in aid: Paid sick leave, unemployment, and food assistance
Phase 3 (March 27, 2020)–Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, (CARES Act)
•	est. $2.3 trillion in aid: Major individual and business assistance and economic stimulus, the largest package addressing COVID-19 to date.
•	The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act – or the CARES Act –provides more than $2 trillion in emergency aid to individuals and businesses in various forms including loans, direct payments, and insurance benefits intended to cushion the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak, or COVID-19.
14.  Stringency index is a composite measure based on nine response indicators including school closures, workplace closures, and travel bans, rescaled to a value from 0 to 100 (100 = strictest). We can see from the pie chart that stringency index was slightly more in Saudi Arabia than in the united states. There could be a couple of reasons to justify this trend of covid-19.
Even though President Donald Trump declared a national emergency to combat the spread of COVID-19 in the USA, including cancellation of schools, bars, cinemas, and restaurants, cancellation of large public gatherings, including cultural and sporting events, the cases increased after the mandatory school suspension resumed and before summer vacation started. USA is a country of great freedom, some states refuse heated wearing face masks because they hold opinion about prioritizing freedom versus regulation. Thus, Certain people are biased to ignore the risks of the pandemic in the USA.
On the other hand in Saudi Arabia, aggressive case finding and isolation, rigorous contact tracing, quarantining, and testing, as well as community-wide surveillance, have been implemented and sustained in addition to social distancing, travel and movement restrictions and other measures to help fight the pandemic. The camel virus that Saudi Arabia has experienced in 2012 helped the country to navigate and regulate the growing number of cases in the pandemic, these measures were taken in spite of their socio-economic, political and religious challenges in the interest of public and global health.
16. We can clearly see from the graph that the new tests to total cases ratio in SAUDI ARABIA is higher at 0.185, while UNITED STATES is at 0.165, meaning the new tests being conducted to total cases is also much higher in kingdom of Saudi Arabia than in the United States. 
17. Policy recommendations:
Social distancing at its various levels should be a key measure to mitigate the transmission of COVID-19. These ranges from suspension or cancelations of religious, entertainment and sporting mass gatherings and events, temporary closure of educational establishments and postponing all non-essential gatherings, to imposing a curfew. 
On top of that, countries should offer continuous support in forms of Economic stimulus measures, Employment-related measures, Funding for Lending and Monetary Policies, especially to the lowest lawyer of society, because in times like that, they suffer the most. Emergency restrictions should be clearly communicated, enacted in a transparent manner, well grounded in law, necessary to serve a legitimate purpose, and proportionate to the threat.
These measures should be taken in spite of their socio-economic, political and religious challenges in the interest of public and global health. However, given the current COVID-19 situation, further bold and probably unpopular measures are likely to be introduced in the future.
